Hi.
NOTE CONF
Hello everyone.
So welcome to week four of calculus and its applications.
NOTE CONF
So today we'll talk about the application of.
So last week you saw will you define derivatives and
NOTE CONF
you studied some properties.
And today we will learn about the applications of derivatives.
NOTE CONF
And there are plenty because indeed it's you know it's
the one of the uh oh here it is.
NOTE CONF
Uh, it's one of the fundamental, uh, um, definitions in
calculus.
NOTE CONF
So here are all the, uh, um, all the applications
listed in your textbook.
NOTE CONF
And today we will look, uh, we will solve problems,
uh, related to some of these.
NOTE CONF
And we will continue on with the others on Thursday.
So let's jump right in.
NOTE CONF
So the, uh, the well, it depends on your point
of view, but for me, uh, what a derivative is,
NOTE CONF
is.
First of all, first and foremost, a linear approximation of
NOTE CONF
a function at a point.
So in this question we ask you to find the
NOTE CONF
linear approximation to this function.
Sorry cubic root of one plus x.
NOTE CONF
And we wanted at point A equals zero.
And now I will uh I will load that on.
NOTE CONF
We'll clap for you so that you can vote.
Let's see if that's okay.
NOTE CONF
That should work.
And let me hide the results.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so a couple of minutes for this.
Thanks.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So.
This is for the first time.
NOTE CONF
It's not.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Very much.
NOTE CONF
I don't remember.
Exactly.
NOTE CONF
So check it.
Out.
NOTE CONF
I think.
So.
NOTE CONF
I think.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So.
You.
NOTE CONF
Should.
Not be.
NOTE CONF
Surprised.
That.
NOTE CONF
They Oh.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Oh.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I think we can, uh, we can look at the
NOTE CONF
results.
So what are the results?
NOTE CONF
Good.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
I tend to agree with the majority.
So let's see why.
NOTE CONF
Well, to be honest, this is not a very deep
question.
NOTE CONF
You just have to remember the definition of a linear
approximation at a point.
NOTE CONF
So here's the definition.
You.
NOTE CONF
You need to find your derivative at the at the
point of interest.
NOTE CONF
And so this is just the formula that's in your
book.
NOTE CONF
Basically this is a very computational exercise.
You don't have to think much.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You don't have to think much.
NOTE CONF
Just know the formula and.
Plug in the numbers.
NOTE CONF
So if you calculate the derivative of this function it's
this this is the expression you get.
NOTE CONF
You evaluate it at zero because that's the point you
want.
NOTE CONF
So you put a you need to put it there.
And so this the this is the expression you obtain.
NOTE CONF
And once you, um, you know, compute everything you get
one plus one over three x.
NOTE CONF
Are there any questions about this?
It's just as I said, there is not much, uh,
NOTE CONF
nothing really deep going on.
You just have to know the formula for.
NOTE CONF
I mean, if you if you think about it, of
course, you can make everything deep.
NOTE CONF
You can think about why this is true and everything,
but, uh, you don't need all that to answer the
NOTE CONF
question, right?
Okay, well let's move on to the to the next
NOTE CONF
question.
So determine the two positive numbers whose sum is 300
NOTE CONF
and whose product is a maximum.
So you need to find two positive numbers.
NOTE CONF
So sum is 300.
And the product is the maximum value that you can
NOTE CONF
obtain out of all the numbers who hold the positive
numbers whose sum is 300?
NOTE CONF
Is the question clear?
Uh oh.
NOTE CONF
Here.
This is the question I am asking them in in
NOTE CONF
a different order today.
So, uh, wait, let me hide the results.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We have, uh, most people voted.
Let's see the results.
NOTE CONF
Nice.
So the results are, um.
NOTE CONF
Oh, wait.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so I will display the correct answer.
Very good.
NOTE CONF
Well done.
Um, so let's let's see why this is true.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so obviously another important application of, uh, derivative is,
uh, finding maxima and minima of a function.
NOTE CONF
And there are, um, but you cannot just blindly, you
know, uh, do things you have to think about which
NOTE CONF
results you're using.
So.
NOTE CONF
Well, first, let's, uh, denote the numbers by x and
uh, 300 minus x.
NOTE CONF
So we have to maximise the following function.
And um, uh, something that, you know, is very tempting
NOTE CONF
to do and indeed will work in this case.
Just find the derivative, set it equal to zero and
NOTE CONF
see, uh, what point you get.
So let's see what kind of solution you get.
NOTE CONF
Um, so setting the derivative equal to zero in this
case will give you a 150.
NOTE CONF
So this is the only critical point.
So is this a maximum.
NOTE CONF
And does the maximum occur at this point.
So to theoretically justify this result you have to think
NOTE CONF
of uh you have to use a very important theorem.
Uh it's the extreme value theorem.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So if your function is continuous over the closed bounded
NOTE CONF
interval AB, then there is a point at which f
has an absolute maximum over AB.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so I will not say anything about the minimum.
We need the maximum here, and the location is either
NOTE CONF
at the critical point.
So where your derivative is zero or at the end
NOTE CONF
point.
So we have to check the behaviour of the function
NOTE CONF
at the end point.
Lucky for us, at the end points we just get.
NOTE CONF
So the values of this function at the end point
just give us zero.
NOTE CONF
So obviously that can't be the maximum.
So indeed the point that we we found was the
NOTE CONF
point of maximum and the value of the function is
22,500.
NOTE CONF
Um, so that's it.
There's that's it.
NOTE CONF
So the point of this question was that, you know,
you should find the critical points.
NOTE CONF
But also don't forget what happens at the at the
end of your interval.
NOTE CONF
In this case, it wasn't relevant.
It didn't give us the maximum, but sometimes it does.
NOTE CONF
Are there any questions about this?
This question.
NOTE CONF
I'll give you a second.
Because we have time.
NOTE CONF
That's good.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we use the extreme value theorem.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Let's move on.
Oh this is my favourite question in today's.
NOTE CONF
Uh, well, yeah, in today's lecture.
So Alex is driving from Edinburgh to Glasgow and the
NOTE CONF
first police radar And camera control is at 14 miles
and the radar measures Alex's speed at this time.
NOTE CONF
10:15 a.m..
As 59mph.
NOTE CONF
The second control is at 3531 miles and measures Alex's
speed at 1030 as 58mph.
NOTE CONF
The speed limit is 60mph.
Will Alex get a speeding ticket?
NOTE CONF
So.
Here's Alex.
NOTE CONF
I will hide the results, and we will together find
out if Alex will get a speeding ticket or not.
NOTE CONF
And of course, we have to be cautious of which
results are we using?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The.
NOTE CONF
Oh, the voting is still going on.
Well, okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, let's let's look at the results.
Uh, yes.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, we think Alex will get a speeding ticket,
and I agree with that.
NOTE CONF
Uh, but, uh, what was the result we used?
What's the, uh, what's why?
NOTE CONF
Basically.
Yes, please.
NOTE CONF
The times of the speed cameras.
The distance between them shows us that Alex went to
NOTE CONF
17 miles in 15 minutes.
And turning that into miles per hour.
NOTE CONF
You can get an average speed of 68mph, which is
a lot higher than 60.
NOTE CONF
That's correct.
So the average speed was a lot higher than 60.
NOTE CONF
That's correct.
So the speed limit is 60.
NOTE CONF
And why does this.
So what's the result that tells us that at some
NOTE CONF
point the speed had to exceed 60.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Very good value theorem indeed.
So it's one of my favourite theorems.
NOTE CONF
So you know, it's it's a it's not a bike.
It may not be very impressive, but it lurks in
NOTE CONF
a lot of results.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So by recall the mean value theorem that if you
have a continuous function on a closed interval and it's
NOTE CONF
differentiable on the open interval within that closed interval, then
there exists a point in the open interval such that
NOTE CONF
the average of the function is equals the the derivative
at that point.
NOTE CONF
As.
And as we said we.
NOTE CONF
The first camera detects Alex at 14 miles sorry from
Edinburgh at 1015.
NOTE CONF
And then 15 minutes later He's at or they're at
31 miles.
NOTE CONF
So.
So Alex travelled 17 miles in 15 minutes.
NOTE CONF
And that gives us the average speed of 68mph.
Therefore, by the mean value theorem, at some point the
NOTE CONF
so the the the speed must have been 68mph, which
exceeds the speed limit.
NOTE CONF
So once again this is the statement.
And uh, here is another, uh, you know, if you
NOTE CONF
ask like several people what's what the derivative means to
them.
NOTE CONF
They will, uh, probably give you a different answers, and
one of them will be the instantaneous speed at the,
NOTE CONF
at the, at a point.
So we are exploiting that the definition of a derivative
NOTE CONF
or that interpretation of the derivative.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Very good.
Well done.
NOTE CONF
Uh, next.
Uh oh.
NOTE CONF
So I like the mean value theorem so much that
I don't want to leave it.
NOTE CONF
So one of the corollaries of the mean value theorem
is that, uh, um, so, uh, if you have a
NOTE CONF
continuous function on a closed interval and differentiable on an
open interval, and then the sign of its derivative tells
NOTE CONF
you whether your, uh, function is strictly increasing, decreasing, or
constant.
NOTE CONF
So this is a consequence of the mean value theorem.
And another very important application is the fundamental theorem of
NOTE CONF
calculus.
So these are modest and humble looking results.
NOTE CONF
They can Uh.
They are the building blocks of something more, um, maybe
NOTE CONF
more impressive and more celebrated.
Okay, nice.
NOTE CONF
The next question is very short.
Is the following statement true or false?
NOTE CONF
The origin.
So the point x equals zero is an inflection point
NOTE CONF
of the function f of x equals x to the
power of four.
NOTE CONF
Um, well obviously to answer this question you have to
remember what's the definition of an inflection point.
NOTE CONF
Uh, where is that question?
Oh, here.
NOTE CONF
It's the first question.
So let me hide the results and let's vote.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, I mean, I don't know if you pay attention,
but, you know, each question is supposed to, uh, investigate
NOTE CONF
or, you know, eliminate one.
One, uh, or let's say some application of the derivative.
NOTE CONF
And one of them is, uh, um, studying the behaviour
of a function or sketching a graph.
NOTE CONF
So this is what we're doing in this question.
Uh, so the orange is the origin, an inflection point
NOTE CONF
of this function.
Let's see how we voted.
NOTE CONF
Uh oh.
That's pretty close.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Interesting.
NOTE CONF
Um, right.
So, well, let's let's discuss this together.
NOTE CONF
As I said, you just have to recall the definition
of an inflection point.
NOTE CONF
What is an inflection point?
An inflection point is a point where your function changes
NOTE CONF
concavity.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So.
Uh, so if if your function was, like concave up
NOTE CONF
at, at, uh, before arriving at the, at the point
and then it changed into concave down, that would be
NOTE CONF
an inflection point.
And concavity is determined by the sine of the second
NOTE CONF
derivative.
So if you're a second derivative at the point were
NOTE CONF
to change the sine, then that point would be the
inflection point.
NOTE CONF
However, for this function, taking the second derivative gives you.
It gives you 12 x squared.
NOTE CONF
12 x squared is positive everywhere except zero, so it's
not really changing Uh, the sign.
NOTE CONF
Right?
So it's not an inflection point.
NOTE CONF
And to illustrate this, let's look at a graph.
So this is what the graph looks like.
NOTE CONF
And indeed you can see that it's not changing concavity
at this point.
NOTE CONF
So so this is f of x.
And it's the concavity stays the same.
NOTE CONF
Are there any questions about this one.
Oh sorry I didn't show you the correct answer.
NOTE CONF
The correct answer is false.
Any questions.
NOTE CONF
So as some of these questions are just about remembering
definitions of things and applying them.
NOTE CONF
What is happening there?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What's the time?
Good.
NOTE CONF
We have.
We have some time.
NOTE CONF
Uh, the next question is about limits.
We need to find the limit of this function.
NOTE CONF
And let me find that question for you here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's, let's let's calculate and vote.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, let's, uh.
NOTE CONF
So, um, fewer people have voted.
Then I was hoping.
NOTE CONF
But it's fine.
Let's discuss this question together.
NOTE CONF
So obviously another very important application of derivatives is in
evaluating limits.
NOTE CONF
And what's the result that helps us do that.
What did you use to answer this question?
NOTE CONF
Just you can just yell.
At us.
NOTE CONF
That's correct.
The thing is, I want you to, you know, obviously
NOTE CONF
use all of these rules there.
That's why they are there.
NOTE CONF
But always, always think whether you can because sometimes you
cannot apply those rules.
NOTE CONF
For example, L'Hopital's rule is, uh, okay.
I didn't, I thought I copied the statement for you.
NOTE CONF
But L'Hopital's rule has some requirements, right?
So the functions need to be differentiable at an open
NOTE CONF
interval containing the point.
Uh, the point you're interested in.
NOTE CONF
And lucky for us both a natural logarithm of x
and this one obviously e to the power of x
NOTE CONF
minus e.
Both these functions are differentiable at the at an open
NOTE CONF
interval containing the point one.
And uh, if you plug in one, you will get
NOTE CONF
zero divided by zero.
So you can indeed apply the rule here.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, I've written this here, but I didn't I
didn't copy the statement of L'Hopital's rule.
NOTE CONF
But.
But please be aware that you need to check the
NOTE CONF
conditions that.
Indeed, you can use L'Hopital's rule because sometimes you can't.
NOTE CONF
Even if you do get a nice fraction of the
form zero zero.
NOTE CONF
But let's say that one of the conditions of l'Hopital
breaks down.
NOTE CONF
For example, these functions are not differentiable at an open
interval containing the point.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So uh, right.
NOTE CONF
Well, just applying it gives us.
So the derivative of maybe.
NOTE CONF
Do I have time?
Yeah I do have time.
NOTE CONF
Um, let me first show you the correct answer.
It's one over E.
NOTE CONF
Well done.
And then I'll show you.
NOTE CONF
How to compute things.
But I think, you know, just to be sure.
NOTE CONF
Ah, so we have limit as x goes to one
l and x divided by e to the x minus
NOTE CONF
e.
It's the same by L'Hopital's rule which we check that
NOTE CONF
we can apply.
And this gives us one over x divided by e
NOTE CONF
to the x.
Now that gives me.
NOTE CONF
Oh sorry.
Always forget this one okay.
NOTE CONF
One over one divided by E to the power one.
And that just gives me one over E.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So all right so for today these are the questions
NOTE CONF
we covered today.
And on Thursday we will continue exploring other applications of
NOTE CONF
the derivative.
We will also do some more of these limit type
NOTE CONF
questions Shows more involved ones, more difficult ones.
So I'll see you on Thursday.
NOTE CONF